# Astera-essay-competition
My submission for Astera Institute's 2026 Essay Competition, Identifying Systemic Bottlenecks to Science

# Begin essay:
As privately and publicly funded groups raced to complete the first sequence of the human genome in the 1990’s, few scientists would have predicted the incredible standardization which has come to characterize 21st-century genomics. Today, near-universal sequencing hardware, processing pipelines, data formats, and gene identifiers empower even a novice bioinformatician to quickly integrate genomic datasets generated on opposite sides of the world. These characteristics have also allowed machine learning-based applications to flourish. Unfortunately, the -omic technologies used to study macromolecules which can not be sequenced (e.g., lipids) lack such standardization. Lipidomics have almost no broadly applicable methodologies for data acquisition, processing, or annotation with unique identifiers. This heterogeneity is not for lack of effort but rather stems from challenges inherent to studying structurally complex molecules which are not synthesized from templates. Not only does the variability in lipidomic data limit the insight human intelligence and statistical approaches can glean from the terabytes of data collected each year, but it also hinders data sharing between labs and the interoperability of analysis tools. I propose that developing hierarchical, mass spectrometry-informed lipid identifiers will increase the insight which can be gained from lipidomic data and provide a framework around which to standardize the field.

Lipids were first discovered to play passive roles such as membrane formation and energy storage. More recently, it has become clear that lipids are also actively utilized to enact myriad cell functions. For example, specific lipid species play essential roles in eicosanoid synthesis, PI3K/Akt signaling, and ferroptotic cell death. Perturbations in lipid metabolism or quality control are implicated in diseases from atherosclerosis to Alzheimer’s, and peroxidation of brain lipids is required for memory formation and learning. While the enzymes which synthesize, modify, and degrade lipids are genetically encoded, the massively interconnected nature of lipid metabolic pathways makes study of this system best suited to direct measurement of the end products – the lipids themselves. Such measurements may be accomplished by high resolution tandem mass spectrometry preceded by a liquid chromatographic separation (LC-MS/MS). Mapping the “peaks” measured by LC-MS/MS to the thousands of possible lipid species is challenging due to inherent, but variable, ambiguities in this type of data.

Glycerophospholipids – just one of 8 general categories of lipids – vary with respect to their head group, backbone, number and length of hydrocarbon chains, number and location of hydrocarbon chain double bonds, and presence and location of post-synthetic modifications (e.g., peroxidation). While LC-MS/MS can differentiate between each of these attributes individually, it cannot do this for all attributes simultaneously. Accordingly, each laboratory hones their protocols to focus on a select few attributes of interest. At the end of a LC-MS/MS analysis it is logical to assign a unique lipid identifier to each peak. The existing “standard” lipid identifier classification system (PMID: 15722563) cannot indicate which attributes were stratified across and measured versus which were not stratified across and are thus aggregated into single peaks. As a result, there is no way to store or communicate these important nuances, massively limiting the sharing and reanalysis of existing data. Furthermore, this systematic shortcoming limits the knowledge which can be gained from a single dataset (of which more below). A new lipid identifier system which can indicate these nuances is needed; the advent of statistical approaches which could maximally leverage such identifiers makes now the optimal time for this advancement. 

An example might help illustrate these ideas. “Normal phase” liquid chromatography is commonly used because it is good at separating, and thus allowing for individual measurement of, phospholipids with different head groups. Normal phase chromatography does not effectively separate lipids based on specific hydrocarbon chain characteristics, however. In contrast, "reverse phase" chromatography separates lipids based on hydrocarbon chain characteristics but not head group. Thus, two phospholipid species which differ only by the position of the hydrocarbon chain double bonds – PI(x/20:3ω9) and PI(x/20:3ω7) – would be detected as a single peak on normal phase LC-MS/MS. Biochemical dogma suggests that this is typically fine, because double bond position makes little contribution to a lipid’s function. Recent studies using reverse phase chromatography have proven that PI(x/20:3ω9) and PI(x/20:3ω7) defy this dogma, however! cPLA2, an important pro-inflammatory enzyme, degrades only the ω9 regioisomer to make pro-inflammatory eicosanoids. Activation of this enzyme simultaneously causes a proportional increase in ω7 for unknown reasons (PMID: 40790030). Thus, on normal phase LC-MS/MS the area of the single peak, which most labs would simply annotate as the canonically more abundant PI(x/20:3ω9) regioisomer, does not change with cPLA2 activation. But negative data always have more potential explanations than positive data. Why are the inherent details which may explain some apparently negative LC-MS/MS data particularly worth preserving?

The field of lipidomics has already devised standard workflows that complementarily stratify data. It is common to run samples in both normal phase and reverse phase liquid chromatography conditions because the former stratifies lipids in ways the latter cannot, and vice versa. This is done to allow for manual exploration of lipids of interest. The proposed hierarchical identifiers would allow for such complementary consideration of all lipids in the lipidome. Imagine an algorithm which integrates all peaks from the same samples run across both chromatography conditions: with current lipid identifiers, the algorithm would “see” that the normal phase data shows no change in PI(x/20:3ω9) levels with cPLA2 activation – though recall that this is actually a sum measurement of both PI(x/20:3ω9) and PI(x/20:3ω7) – while the reverse phase data shows a reduction of PI(x/20:3ω9). Such discordant data are likely to be spurious, so the algorithm would assign a high p-value. In contrast, hierarchical, mass spectrometry-based lipid identifiers would allow better performance: the algorithm sees that the normal phase data provides no information about PI(x/20:3ω9) levels while the reverse phase data show a reduction with cPLA2 activation. These results are consistent with a meaningful decrease in PI(x/20:3ω9), so the algorithm would assign a small p-value. The ideas presented here about integrating data across chromatography conditions are not novel; it is only the inadequacy of the current lipid identification system which prevents such analyses from being conducted at scale.
The multidimensional, complex information which needs to be retained for each peak by lipid identifiers is too complex for the human brain to make sense of. Accordingly, this new convention will necessarily be accompanied by a shift from identifiers which were designed to be human-readable (i.e., the current classification system) to identifiers that are purpose-built for use by computer code. I envision each lipid identifier as a hierarchical data type which can be flattened into a single string for human viewing:

`[lipid_class] [radyl_carbons:double_bonds] [chain_1_carbons:double_bonds, …, chain_n_carbons:double_bonds]`

Within each bracket, the pipe | may represent different possibilities (e.g., [PC|PE] [34:1|37:1]) and the ampersand & may suggest certain co-elution of different species (e.g. [PC] [34:1] [16:1_18:0&16:0_18:1]). Within the hydrocarbon chain bracket (shown last in the preceding example), the underscore _ could indicate that the stereospecificity of the chains is unknown whereas the backslash / could separate chains of known stereospecificity in order sn-1/sn-2/…. Modifications at any level may follow in parentheses (e.g., (+1O)) and their position would follow them in brackets (e.g., [ω9]). (Notably, these structural details could be programmatically assigned to peaks by modifying one of the many existing algorithms for lipid annotation, such as that used by mzmine [PMID: 36859716].) Developing these ideas to generate a functional identifier system will be challenging, but I believe doing so would build a framework around which existing workflows could quickly adapt. Making the identifier system readily accessible through R packages, Python libraries, web applications, and integration into existing tools such as mzmine will be required for effective community uptake.

My underlying hypothesis is that combining a mass spectrometry-informed, hierarchical lipid identifier system with bioinformatic algorithms will yield novel biological insight from existing datasets. This could be tested by generating a minimum viable product in the form of a hierarchical identifier system for phospholipids. Next, these hierarchical identifiers could be used for two analyses, each of which leverages a unique aspect of the proposed lipid identification system: 1) analysis of a lipidomic dataset which uses both normal and reverse phase chromatography and 2) integration and analysis of two reverse phase datasets which were generated on the same hardware and investigate the same pathway.

For the first analysis, dataset ST001820 on Metabolomics Workbench has normal and reverse phase lipidomics of an in vitro model for Alzheimer’s disease, wild type neurons treated with astrocyte conditioned media from APOE3/3 or APOE4/4 astrocytes. As described above, by combining these analyses with hierarchical identifiers which retain the full nuance of peak identity under each chromatography type, there might be improved ability to detect real and meaningful changes in lipid species between conditions. In other words, this analysis would attempt to leverage the increased information stored in each identifier. For the second analysis, the standardized, machine-readable nature of the new identifiers could be leveraged to integrate two unique datasets deposited to Metabolomics Workbench by one research group. These datasets both investigate a protein called TREM2 which has been implicated in pathogenesis of late onset Alzheimer’s disease. ST004205 compares lipidomes of wild type versus TREM2 knockout iPSC1-derived microglia and ST003501 analyzes wild type versus APP overexpressing microglial cells sorted based on TREM2 expression. By looking for lipids which change with both TREM2 depletion and enrichment this analysis could identify species directly modified by TREM2 rather than those that change through second-order effects. These analyses may unveil novel therapeutic targets in the form of dysregulated lipid metabolic enzyme activity or may hint at specific features of Alzheimer’s pathogenesis which may be modifiable by existing anti-inflammatory or antioxidant molecules. 

Although lipidomics holds great promise to advance our understanding of human health and disease, the inadequacy of lipid identification systems limits the insight which can be gleaned from these rich datasets. The current “standard” lipid identifier system was designed solely with human interpretation in mind and does not have the capacity to reflect the nuance and uncertainty which necessarily accompany lipidomic measurements. I propose that the development of a machine-readable hierarchical classification system would allow for more knowledge to be gained from lipidomics data. Existing practices within mass spectrometry, such as the use of both normal and reverse phase chromatography, are well-suited to integrative analyses which leverage such information-rich identifiers. The advent of machine learning approaches to analyze complex data makes now the optimal time for this advancement. Developing an improved lipid identification system will build a framework around which the rest of lipidomic technologies can standardize, in this way advancing the field.
